---
link: https://rtime.felk.cvut.cz/publications/public/rtlws2012-sojka.pdf
---

# TLDR;

This paper compares the impact of operating system (OS) noise on time measurement accuracy in NOVA and Linux. It evaluates cache-related preemption and migration delays in both systems and discusses the levels of OS noise. The expectation of lower noise from NOVA was largely met, but the comparison outcomes were complex and not straightforward.

---

The results vary depending on the experiment, but there is a clearly visible trend in all experiments – the noise generated by the microkernel is in most cases the lowest, Debian/Linux sits in the middle and the highest noise is produced by a minimal configuration of the Linux kernel.

Besides running the measurement application itself, the operating system performs additional activities, that have the impact on the measured time.

NOVA and NUL have several interesting properties that we believe are important for reduction of OS noise. These are:

1. Small memory footprint. The size of uncompressed kernel binary is only 66 KiB. The “hot” code used most often during system execution (IPC) is extremely small – about 1KiB. This code occupies only a fraction of typical L1 cache memory.
2. Very little kernel code is executed without the user space explicitly asking for it.
3. User space (also very small) can be configured to not run components (drivers, services) that are not needed for the particular application.

The results are not as straightforward as we initially expected. We summarize our observations in the following points:

- In most cases the noise produced by NOVA microkernel is much lower than the noise of Linux. There are, however, the cases where the opposite is true.
- Operating system is not the only dominant source of noise. In some experiments we could see increased level of noise for working set sizes greater than the cache memory. In those cases the noise was approximately the same for all evaluated systems. From this, we conclude that the access to off-CPU resources is also a significant source of noise.
- System management interrupts (provided that the NOVA spikes are caused by them) are really big source of noise.
- Configuration of the Linux kernel has significant impact on the observed noise.
